---
layout: post
title: Two PhD Positions
lang: en
ref: jobs
categories: QuaDramA
authors:
- Nils Reiter
- Marcus Willand
---

We are looking for two candidates for PhD positions, to work in  the interdisciplinary research project **QuaDramA: Quantitative Drama Analytics**, funded by Volkswagen Foundation and soon starting at University of Stuttgart. Both positions are to be filled for maximally three years.
<!--more-->
- **1 PhD position in NLP (TV-L 13, 65%)**, at the Institute for Natural Language Processing (Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung, IMS)
- **1 PhD position in German Literary Studies (TV-L 13, 65%)** at the Institute for Literary Studies (Institut für Literaturwissenschaft, ILW)

# About QuaDramA
We investigate dramatic figures in German theatre plays from 1750 until 1900. We will combine and integrate qualitative, hermeneutic approaches with quantitative, computer-aided text analysis. The project aims at a) a new perspective on drama history and b) new methods and tools for the processing of dramatic texts on a large scale (you'll find more about this project on [our web page](http://quadrama.github.io))


## NLP position
- Master-level degree in computational linguistics or natural language processing.
- Coreference resolution and domain adaptation will be the focusses of the NLP part of the project. Interest in these areas is presumed, past experiences are a plus.
- Willingness to learn or proficiency in Java, [Apache UIMA](https://uima.apache.org), [R](https://www.r-project.org)
- Good command of the German language


## GLS position
- Master-level degree in *German Literature*  or a Bachelor degree in *German Literature* and a Master in *Digital Humanities*
- PhD thesis about drama history, theory, poetology and/or figure analysis, concepts and types (stock characters)
- Willingness to work on a theoretic level with concepts of figures and figure types

## General requirements for both applicants
- Willingness to learn, apply and reflect upon new methods and workflows
- Interdisciplinary communication skills
- Participation in regular local meetings
- Ability to work in a team, interest in the respective "other" discipline
- Read, discuss and publish in English or German
- Readiness to share project-related interim results publicly
- Experiences in the digital humanities is a plus for both positions


# Graduating and working at Stuttgart University
Both PhD theses should be related to the project and will be advised locally. The following Professors are ready to advise the thesis: Prof. Dr. Jonas Kuhn (Natural Language Processing), Prof. Dr. Sandra Richter (Literary Studies), Prof. Dr. Gabriel Viehhauser (Digital Humanities).

Stuttgart University offers ideal conditions for doctoral students, including for research in the area of digital humanities (that are represented with an original Master's program). The so-called *Stuttgarter Weg* represents the interdisciplinary integration of engineering, natural sciences, humanities and social sciences, and is encoded in the overall university concept. QuaDramA is one example of this concept.

# Your Application
Please send your application until February 28th as a single PDF document to quadrama@ims.uni-stuttgart.de. Interviews will take place in the week starting March 13, either locally in Stuttgart or via phone/video chat. If you have any questions, please feel invited to write us an email.
Please include the following documents in your application:

- Curriculum Vitae
- Covering letter (max. 1 page)
- Degree certificate
- If applicable: Representative work sample for previous research
- PhD thesis outline (max. 3 pages), including timeline and points of contact/integration ideas for the QuaDramA project (only application for the PhD position in literary studies)
- Excerpt from a self-written scientific paper (max. 3 pages, e.g., bachelor's or master's thesis; only applications for the PhD position in NLP)
- Two references to university personnel (name and university), to be contacted by us


We advocate equal opportunities for women. The University of Stuttgart also wants to increase the proportion of female scientists. Women are therefore expressly invited to apply. Handicapped applicants will be given preference if equally qualified.


## Contact

[quadrama@ims.uni-stuttgart.de](mailto:quadrama@ims.uni-stuttgart.de)

```
Dr. Marcus Willand
Neuere Deutsche Literatur II
Keplerstr. 17
70174 Stuttgart
```

```
Dr. Nils Reiter
Institut für Maschinelle Sprachverarbeitung
Pfaffenwaldring 5b
70569 Stuttgart
```
